---
annotation_id: 09fe1f3b-2391-4c29-abbe-3187c1dc668b
author: rmadams
tei_target: "#highlight-09fe1f3b-2391-4c29-abbe-3187c1dc668b"
annotated_page: rdx_t9tzs.p.idm140132110501984
page_index: 23
target: highlight-09fe1f3b-2391-4c29-abbe-3187c1dc668b

---
Theology: When Jesus sent his disciples out to preach and heal, he told them to live simply, taking no money, no sandals, no staff, and no extra coat. This is reflected in the image of the disciples laying down their purse, belt, and cloak in front of Jesus, who himself is barefoot and wearing simple clothing as his hand makes a gesture of blessing. 

Based on previous images, St. Peter is likely the figure on the left of the picture. As a leader of the disciples before and after Jesus’ resurrection, he is shown following Jesus’ instructions. The second Bible reference under the picture makes another reference to Peter’s poverty. In the Acts of the Apostles, Peter and John met a man who could not walk. Peter healed him, saying, “I have no silver and gold, but what I do have I give to you. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk!” (Acts 3:6).

The final line of text drives home this point about Peter’s poverty, as it asks, “Where then is Peter’s patrimony?” The so-called patrimony of St. Peter was a medieval tradition going back to the legalization of Christianity in the Roman Empire under Constantine, which connected the church with legal rights as property owners and eventually rulers of lands. With the complicated dynastic struggles of the early Middle Ages in the Italian peninsula and central Europe, the papacy emerged as a major political force and landowner. Along with later forgeries like the Donation of Constantine, the “patrimony of St. Peter” became part of the religious and legal justification for the papacy’s growing political authority. 
