---
annotation_id: b2d056e3-3d5c-49fe-ac6e-910ee0ae2b9a
author: rmadams
tei_target: "#highlight-b2d056e3-3d5c-49fe-ac6e-910ee0ae2b9a"
annotated_page: rdx_t9th0.p.idm140132112314832
page_index: 10
target: highlight-b2d056e3-3d5c-49fe-ac6e-910ee0ae2b9a

---
Theology: In the contrasting image, dignitaries are lined up to kiss the foot of the pope, who is again seated on a throne wearing a royal robe and crown. With his hand making a sign of blessing, the pope praises those at his feet, a crowd which includes royalty and other fancily dressed men and women. At his side are a cardinal, bishop, and monk, distinguished by their headwear: the cardinal wears a galero hat, the bishop has a miter and staff (or crosier), and the monk has a tonsure haircut. They look down on the lay people at the pope’s feet, as an indication of the second-class spiritual status of all lay people, wealthy though they may be. Rather than serving others as Christ did, the pope is being served and admired by others. 

The text under this image identifies this proud attitude as a sign of the second beast of Revelation 13, which says that those who do not worship this beast will be slain (Revelation 13:15). Rather than being ashamed of such idolatrous devotion, the text then cites a section of church law that celebrates such devotion. 

Assuming that Jesus is washing and kissing the foot of St. Peter, the contrast grows even stronger: Christ serves Peter, while the popes (traditionally viewed as Peter’s successors) demand that others kneel before them.  
